why Linux?
most of the servers, DevOps tools run on Linux. Tools like Kubernetes and docker had initially supported Linux and Linux offers great automation.

what are the common problems that windows users face to transit to Linux?
Understanding different package managers because of distros, command line familiarity

working with shell
shell allows text based interaction between user and the operating system.
Home directory is the first directory that we will be in when we log in to a Linux system.
~ command represent the home directory

echo command is used to print a line of text on the terminal.
we need arguments with echo command to print what is to be printed .
arguments are inputs to a command that modify the command for a specific need.
options are meant to serve a purpose within the command


two types of commands
internal - they are commands that are built in to the shell and execute faster.
external - they are executable files stored in a system where shell will locate and load. we can create custom external commands.
To check if the command is internal or external use type command.


Basic commands of Linux
pwd - present working directory
ls - list contents
mkdir - directory creation(multiple directories can be created at once using space between directory names
mkdir dir1/dir2 creates dir2 inside dir1
mkdir -p dir1/dir2 creates both dir1 and inside it creates dir2

cd .. - go to the up directory
cd - home directory
cd /dir1/dir2 - goes to dir2

Absolute and relative path
absolute path- location starting from root directory e.g., cd /home/dir1

relative path - the path of the file starting from current directory to subdirectories directly from current path 

pushd and popd - pushd can be used to keep a memory of directory we were in previously so that popd can be used to follow navigation in reverse order 

mv - move command has two arguments source and destination
mv source dest
mv can be used to rename as well use relative path of the source(name that has to be changed) and dest(the new name)

cp - copy sourcefile destination

rm filename - remove the file 
cp -r - recursive operation(recursive copies the entire subdirectories from source to dest)

cat command is used to read the content of the file 
cat relative/absolute path of the file 

cat > filename(asks for input to append the text)
input some text and press ctrl+d to save the file  

touch is used to create an empty file 
touch relativepathtothefile

more filenameorpathtofile gives the contents of the file in a scrollable manner
space to scroll one screen of data
enter to scroll one line of data
b to scroll line backwards
/ to search for the text 
q to exit out 

ls -l gives details of the file in the directories
ls -a gives the hidden files 
ls -lt to sort the files based on latest used
ls -ltr to reverse the sort based on oldest used

Help in command line 
whatis commandname gives a single line description of the command

man commandname gives the usecase and desc of the command

commandname --help or -h gives the options available for command 

apropos command lists all the commands and uses based on the the keyword term that we specify 

apropos file gives commands that have keyword 'file' in either desc or name

different types of shells
bourne shell
cshell
kor shell
z shell
bourne again shell(bash)

echo $shell gives the shell that we are using currently 
chsh is used to change the type of shell


Bash shell features - 
1. tab key allows command completion 
2. we can set custom aliases(alias custname=actualname) 
3. history command helps to track all the commands used previously

$ is environment variable that stores value of environment variables 
$shell store 
env list all the environment variables set 
to set an environment variable use export varname=value
to add them permanently set variables in .pam_environment or .profile in home directory

echo $ prints value of env variable specified

each $path list all paths of binaries 
which commandname gives the path of the binaries of the command
environment variables are case sensitive
if not present we can use export path=%path:/opt/command/bin

bash prompt is the way of appearance of shell that is within the brackets for each command
example echo $ps1 changes the shell to appear like [\w]$
basically ps1 env variable contains the way of appearance of bash prompt

Linux kernel
responsible for intermediate between Linux operating system and hardware like memory management, process management, device drivers, systemcalls and security

It is monolithic and modular(dynamic with custom modules)

commands 
uname - to display info about kernel 
uname -r to get the info about all versions 
first digit is the kernel version

memory is divided into kernel space and user space 
kernel space is portion of memory for kernel code or extensions or drivers

user space is portion of memory that user can use for his use(programs written by user)

to access something on hardware, user calls the kernel and then the user gets back control 

example when a usb is attached, kernel space first detects the usb and then it is sent to user space with udev 

grep is used to search for specific keywords



